Project Description (Revised)
Overview

A two-stage machine learning system that predicts Valorant professional match outcomes at the map level, producing full outcome distributions rather than binary win probabilities. Given an upcoming Bo3/Bo5 match, the system predicts the map veto sequence, then predicts a four-way outcome distribution for each resulting map (each team winning in regulation vs. overtime), and finally aggregates these into a complete series scoreline distribution.

The core insight distinguishing this from naive match predictors: map selection is not random. Teams ban maps they are weak on and pick maps they are strong on. Modeling the veto explicitly captures a real causal mechanism, and produces interpretable output such as "Team A is favored overall, but if the veto reaches Bind, Team B becomes the favorite."

The second distinguishing feature: outcome granularity. Predicting "Team A wins 62%" discards information. Predicting "Team A 2-0 at 31%, Team A 2-1 at 29%, Team B 2-1 at 22%, Team B 2-0 at 18%" captures both who is favored and how decisively — and separating regulation from overtime at the map level captures how close the individual maps are expected to be.

Output Specification
Per map — four-way distribution
Outcome	Meaning
P(A wins in regulation)	A reaches 13 with opponent at ≤11
P(A wins in overtime)	Map reaches 12-12, A wins OT
P(B wins in overtime)	Map reaches 12-12, B wins OT
P(B wins in regulation)	B reaches 13 with opponent at ≤11

These four probabilities sum to 1. Note the natural ordinal structure: the outcomes are ordered from "decisive A" through "narrow A" and "narrow B" to "decisive B", which the modeling approach exploits.

Per series — scoreline distribution

Bo3 (4 outcomes): A 2-0, A 2-1, B 2-1, B 2-0

Bo5 (6 outcomes): A 3-0, A 3-1, A 3-2, B 3-2, B 3-1, B 3-0

Both sum to 1. Marginalizing recovers the simple match win probability, so nothing is lost relative to a binary predictor.

Data Source

Scraped from vlr.gg (server-rendered HTML, requests + BeautifulSoup sufficient):

Entity	Fields
Match	teams, date, event, format (Bo1/3/5), final series score
Veto log	ordered sequence of ban/pick/decider actions per team
Map result	map name, final score including OT rounds, attack/defense half splits, winner
Player-map stats	ACS, K/D/A, ADR, KAST, FKPR, FDPR, HS%, agent played
Team metadata	region, event seeding, roster history

New parsing requirement: map scores must be captured exactly, not just as a winner flag. A 13-11 and a 16-14 are different training labels. Any score where both teams reach 12+ is an overtime map. This makes the score parser load-bearing rather than incidental — validate it carefully.

Scope constraint for v1: one region, current map pool era, ~2 recent events (roughly 30–60 matches / 90–150 maps).

System Architecture
Upcoming match (Team A vs Team B, Bo3/Bo5, map pool)
        │
        ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 1: Veto Predictor         │  → distribution over map sequences
└─────────────────────────────────┘
        │
        ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 2: Map Outcome Model      │  → 4-way distribution per candidate map
│  (A-reg / A-OT / B-OT / B-reg)  │
└─────────────────────────────────┘
        │
        ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────┐
│ STAGE 3: Series Aggregator      │  → full scoreline distribution
│  (Bo3: 4 outcomes, Bo5: 6)      │
└─────────────────────────────────┘
        │
        ▼
   Map-by-map + series scoreline predictions with confidence
Stage 1 — Veto Prediction

Unchanged from the binary-output design. The veto model predicts which maps are played, independent of how those maps are scored.

Task: Given two teams and the active map pool, predict the ordered sequence of bans and picks.

Method progression:

Rule-based greedy simulator (baseline). Each team bans the remaining map with its lowest shrunk win rate, picks the remaining map with its highest.
Sequential softmax classifier (primary). Score each remaining map with a learned function of features, normalize over the available pool, train with cross-entropy against observed choices. Separate models for bans and picks.
Optional: sequence model (LSTM/transformer over partial veto state) — future work, not v1.

Output: Monte Carlo samples of full veto sequences with associated probabilities.

Stage 2 — Per-Map Outcome Prediction

Task: Given a map and two teams, predict the four-way outcome distribution.

Method progression:

Baseline: shrunk win rate + global OT rate. Estimate P(A wins) via Bayesian shrinkage as before, estimate the base rate of overtime maps globally (~10–15% of Valorant maps), and split each side's probability by that rate. Crude but establishes a benchmark.
Primary: ordinal logistic regression. The four outcomes are ordered along a "margin" axis: decisive-A → narrow-A → narrow-B → decisive-B. An ordered logit model estimates a single latent strength differential plus three thresholds separating the categories, which is far more parameter-efficient than treating the four outcomes as unrelated classes.
Comparison arm: multinomial logistic regression. Four independent classes, ignoring order. Worth benchmarking to confirm the ordinal assumption helps rather than hurts.
Alternative: two-part (hurdle) model. Model P(map goes to overtime) separately from P(A wins | regulation) and P(A wins | overtime). Decomposes into three simple binary models and is easier to interpret; useful if the ordinal structure proves a poor fit.
Optional refinement: round-differential regression. Model the expected round margin as a continuous variable, then map the predicted distribution over margins onto the four outcome buckets via the score thresholds. Uses full scoreline information rather than collapsing to categories — attractive if data allows, but adds complexity.

New feature group for OT modeling:

Group	Examples
Closeness propensity	historical frequency of close maps (≤2 round margin) per team
OT record	team win rate in overtime specifically (heavily shrunk — very sparse)
Team parity	absolute difference in Elo/rating between the teams
Map closeness	historical variance of round margins on this specific map

Existing feature groups (map-specific strength, general team strength, player form, composition, head-to-head, context) carry over unchanged.

Stage 3 — Series Aggregation

Task: Combine Stage 1 map probabilities and Stage 2 outcome distributions into a full scoreline distribution.

Method:

Collapse each map's four-way distribution to a binary win probability (sum regulation + OT per side) — series scorelines depend only on who won each map, not how.
For each sampled veto sequence, enumerate series paths:
Bo3: A 2-0 = P(A wins m1)·P(A wins m2); A 2-1 = P(A)·P(B)·P(A) + P(B)·P(A)·P(A); symmetric for B.
Bo5: enumerate all paths to 3 wins; the number of paths to each scoreline follows the standard binomial-path count (1 path to 3-0, 3 to 3-1, 6 to 3-2).
Map identity matters — map 2 and map 3 have different win probabilities, so paths must be enumerated with map-specific probabilities rather than treated as identical trials.
Marginalize across veto sequences, weighting by sequence probability.

Retained per-map detail: the four-way distributions are reported alongside the series scoreline, since a user wants both "A wins 2-1" and "the deciding map is expected to be close."

Confidence quantification — three components, reported separately:

Epistemic (data sparsity): bootstrap over the training set to obtain prediction intervals; wide intervals where map samples are thin.
Veto-conditional variance: spread of predictions across sampled veto sequences — high spread means the match hinges on the veto.
Calibration: measured empirically via reliability diagrams, now assessed per outcome category rather than on a single binary probability.
Evaluation Protocol

Splitting: strictly chronological; most recent ~15–20% held out. Walk-forward cross-validation for hyperparameter selection.

Baselines to beat:

Stage	Baseline
Veto	most frequently played map in current meta
Map outcome	shrunk win rate split by global OT base rate
Series	direct series-scoreline classifier ignoring maps entirely

Metrics — revised for multi-class output:

Multi-class log loss across the four map outcomes and across the series scorelines
Ranked Probability Score (RPS) — the appropriate proper scoring rule for ordered outcomes. Unlike log loss, RPS penalizes by distance from the true outcome, so predicting "A 2-0" when the result is "A 2-1" is penalized less than predicting it when the result is "B 2-0". This is the standard metric in football/esports scoreline forecasting and should be the headline number.
Marginal accuracy — collapse to binary winner and report accuracy, for comparability with simpler models
Per-category calibration — is the model's predicted OT rate close to the observed rate? Overtime is the sparsest category and the most likely to be miscalibrated.
Stage isolation — Stage 2 evaluated on actual maps vs. predicted maps, to attribute error.
Known Risks and Mitigations
Risk	Mitigation
Overtime sparsity (~10–15% of maps → perhaps 10–20 OT maps in v1)	Ordinal model shares parameters across categories rather than fitting OT independently; hurdle model as fallback; consider pooling extra historical data specifically to estimate the OT rate
Small sample size overall	Linear/ordinal models with regularization; Bayesian shrinkage throughout
Multi-class dilution — 4 or 6 outcomes over ~100 samples	Ordinal structure reduces effective parameter count; report marginal binary accuracy alongside to detect whether granularity is costing predictive power
Map pool rotation	Filter to a single map pool era; pool as configurable parameter
Roster changes	Flag and decay team features after changes
Score parsing errors	Unit test the parser against known OT and regulation examples; assert score validity (winner ≥13, OT implies both ≥12)
Error compounding across stages	Stage isolation testing; report oracle-veto and predicted-veto performance
Scraping etiquette	Rate limiting, disk caching, respect robots.txt
Deliverable
predict(team_a, team_b, best_of, map_pool, as_of_date) →
  {
    predicted_veto: ordered sequence with per-action probabilities,

    per_map: [
      {
        map: str,
        p_a_regulation: float,
        p_a_overtime:   float,
        p_b_overtime:   float,
        p_b_regulation: float,
        confidence_interval: ...,
        n_games_backing: int
      }, ...
    ],

    series: {                      # Bo3
      "A 2-0": float, "A 2-1": float,
      "B 2-1": float, "B 2-0": float
    },
    # Bo5: "A 3-0", "A 3-1", "A 3-2", "B 3-2", "B 3-1", "B 3-0"

    veto_sensitivity: variance in outcome across veto scenarios,
    narrative: plain-language explanation
  }

Optional GenAI layer: an LLM consuming the structured output to generate a scouting-report narrative. Strictly a presentation layer — the LLM must not perform prediction, or calibration guarantees are lost.

ML Foundations by Stage
Stage 1 — Veto Prediction
The learning problem

Structured prediction: the output is an ordered sequence where each decision constrains the ones after it. The standard tractability trick is sequential decomposition — factor the joint probability into per-step conditionals:

P(veto sequence) = ∏ₜ P(actionₜ | state before step t)

This converts one hard structured-prediction problem into a series of ordinary classification problems. You lose long-range strategic reasoning (a team saving a ban in anticipation of a later pick), but gain trainability on a small dataset. That trade is correct at your scale.

The per-step model: learning-to-rank over a variable action set

Each step is a choice among the remaining maps, a set that shrinks as the veto progresses — which rules out a fixed multiclass classifier, since the class count changes each step.

The formulation is a scoring function with softmax normalization over the candidate set:

Learn s(map, state) → ℝ scoring each remaining map's attractiveness for the acting team
P(map i chosen) = exp(s(mapᵢ)) / Σⱼ exp(s(mapⱼ)), summed over remaining maps only
Train by minimizing cross-entropy against the observed choice

This is the Plackett–Luce / conditional logit model — the same structure used in discrete choice modeling in economics and learning-to-rank in information retrieval. It handles variable candidate sets natively because normalization happens over whatever is available.

Key modeling decision: score by features, not identity. One parameter per map cannot generalize to a rotated pool and overfits badly on ~50 vetoes. Feature-based scoring learns the transferable rule "teams ban maps they lose on" by pooling all observations.

Why separate ban and pick models

Bans and picks have opposite objectives — a ban selects the least-wanted map, a pick the most-wanted. One model handling both must learn a sign flip conditional on an action-type indicator. With limited data, separate models with independent coefficients are lower-variance and more interpretable.

Why the rule-based baseline matters mathematically

The greedy simulator is a hard-argmax special case of the softmax model — what the learned model becomes as softmax temperature → 0 with win rate as the sole feature. Beating it demonstrates either that additional features carry signal, or that veto behavior is genuinely stochastic and probabilistic output is better calibrated than a deterministic guess. Framing the baseline as a degenerate case makes the comparison principled rather than arbitrary.

Inference: ancestral sampling

Sample forward: draw from step 1's distribution, update the pool, draw from step 2's, and so on. N repetitions give an empirical distribution over sequences. Exact enumeration is feasible for short vetoes, but sampling scales better and integrates cleanly with Stage 3.

Stage 2 — Per-Map Outcome Prediction
From binary to ordered multi-class

The shift to four outcomes changes the learning problem's type, not just its size. Naively this is four-class classification, but the classes are not exchangeable — they lie on an ordered axis:

A decisive  →  A narrow  →  B narrow  →  B decisive
(A reg)        (A OT)        (B OT)       (B reg)

Treating them as unordered discards this structure, and the cost is concrete: a multinomial model fits three independent coefficient vectors (K−1 for K classes), tripling the parameter count against a fixed ~100-sample dataset. It must learn from data that "A-reg" and "A-OT" are adjacent, when you already know it.

Ordinal logistic regression (proportional odds)

The ordinal model assumes a single latent continuous variable — interpret it as team A's underlying advantage on this map — cut by three learned thresholds:

      A reg    │   A OT   │   B OT   │    B reg
─────────────────┼──────────┼──────────┼─────────────→  latent advantage
              τ₃           τ₂          τ₁

Formally, with latent score η = βᵀx, the model gives cumulative probabilities P(outcome ≤ k) = σ(τₖ − η), and category probabilities follow by differencing adjacent cumulatives.

The parameter economy is the point: one coefficient vector β plus three scalar thresholds, versus three full coefficient vectors for multinomial. At ~100 samples this difference is decisive.

The model also has a natural interpretation. β shifts the latent advantage — features that make A stronger push probability mass leftward across all thresholds simultaneously. The thresholds encode how much advantage is needed to convert a coin-flip into a narrow win, and a narrow win into a decisive one. The middle two categories (the OT band) are narrow precisely because overtime requires the latent advantage to sit near zero, which matches the reality that OT happens when teams are closely matched.

The proportional odds assumption — that β is shared across all thresholds — is the model's central restriction and should be tested, not assumed. A Brant test or simply comparing fit against the multinomial arm will reveal violations. A plausible violation: some features might predict closeness (pushing toward the OT band from both sides) without predicting direction, which the proportional-odds form cannot express since it only shifts along one axis. If that shows up in diagnostics, the hurdle model is the principled fallback.

The hurdle alternative

Decompose into three binary models:

P(map goes to OT) — a "closeness" model
P(A wins | regulation)
P(A wins | overtime)

This separates closeness from direction, which the ordinal model conflates. It is strictly more expressive along that dimension and each component is an ordinary logistic regression. Cost: the OT-conditional model trains on only the OT maps — perhaps 10–20 rows in v1 — which is likely too few to fit anything but an intercept. A reasonable compromise is to fit models 1 and 2 properly and fix model 3 at 0.5 plus a small strength adjustment, on the reasonable prior that overtime is close to a coin flip.

Overtime sparsity as the central statistical challenge

At roughly 10–15% base rate, v1 yields perhaps 10–20 overtime maps — a severe class imbalance problem in the two middle categories.

Three defensible responses:

Parameter sharing (preferred). The ordinal model estimates OT probabilities largely from the threshold parameters, which are informed by all observations, not just OT ones. This is why the ordinal structure is not merely elegant but practically necessary here.
Hierarchical pooling of the base rate. Estimate the global OT rate from a wider dataset (all regions, longer history), then let team-specific deviations shrink heavily toward it. The team-level OT signal is almost certainly too weak to estimate directly.
Resist resampling. SMOTE or class reweighting improve accuracy metrics but destroy calibration by distorting the base rate — and calibration is the actual goal. Avoid.
Calibration remains the objective

The goal is not maximizing accuracy but producing well-calibrated distributions. A model saying 60% and right 60% of the time beats one saying 95% and right 70%. This dictates proper scoring rules as loss functions — minimized only by reporting true probabilities, so overconfidence cannot game them.

For ordered multi-class outcomes, the right scoring rule is the Ranked Probability Score:

RPS = (1/(K−1)) · Σₖ (Fₖ_predicted − Fₖ_actual)²

where F denotes cumulative probabilities. Unlike log loss, RPS is distance-sensitive: predicting "A 2-0" when the truth is "A 2-1" is penalized less than predicting it when the truth is "B 2-0". This matches the intuition that near-misses are better than complete misses, and is why RPS is standard in football scoreline forecasting. Report it as the headline metric, with multi-class log loss alongside.

Post-hoc calibration becomes harder with multi-class output. Platt scaling extends to the ordinal case by rescaling the latent score before applying thresholds — a one-parameter temperature adjustment, appropriately low-variance for small data. Full multi-class isotonic regression needs far more data than v1 provides. Calibration must be fit on data disjoint from both training and final evaluation.

Hierarchical shrinkage as empirical Bayes

The Bayesian-shrunk win rate is a partial pooling estimator:

shrunk_rate = (wins + k·prior) / (games + k)

This is the posterior mean of a Beta-Binomial model with a Beta prior centered on the team's overall win rate with pseudo-count k. Each team's map-specific ability is treated as drawn from a distribution centered on its general ability — with few observations the estimate stays near the prior, with many the data dominates.

This is the James–Stein result: shrunk estimators dominate raw per-group means in total squared error when estimating many related quantities simultaneously. You are estimating (teams × maps) win rates from sparse data, exactly that setting. Choose k by cross-validation, not intuition.

The same logic extends to the new closeness features. "Team A's overtime rate" over 15 maps is nearly pure noise and must shrink hard toward the global rate.

Feature construction and leakage

The dominant failure mode in sports prediction is temporal leakage. Every feature must be a function only of information strictly prior to the match date. Feature computation is therefore a point-in-time query, not a global aggregate — "Team A's map win rate" is undefined without an as-of date, and computing it over the full dataset silently encodes future results into past training rows. A leaked model validates beautifully and fails completely in deployment.

Rolling form features apply exponential or windowed decay to weight recent matches more heavily, encoding the non-stationarity assumption that team strength drifts over time.

Optional: the round-differential formulation

Rather than modeling four categories, model the round margin as a continuous outcome and derive categories from its distribution. Predict a distribution over final margin (Skellam-like, or a regression with an explicit error distribution), then integrate over the regions corresponding to each outcome:

margin ≥ +2 → A regulation
margin = +1 (in OT range) → A overtime
etc.

This uses full scoreline information rather than collapsing to categories, so 13-2 and 13-11 contribute different information rather than being identical training labels. It is more statistically efficient in principle. The cost is that the error distribution must be specified correctly, and Valorant's score structure (first to 13, win by 2 in OT) makes the mapping from margin to category slightly awkward. Reasonable as a v2 refinement once the categorical version works.

Stage 3 — Series Aggregation
Marginalization over a latent variable

Stage 3 is not a learned model but probabilistic inference over the previous stages' outputs. The map sequence is a latent variable unobserved at prediction time, so marginalize it out:

P(scoreline s) = Σ_sequences P(scoreline s | sequence) · P(sequence)

Stage 1 supplies P(sequence); Stage 2 supplies the conditional. This is the law of total probability applied to a two-stage generative structure, and it is what makes the pipeline coherent rather than an ad-hoc chaining of models.

The estimator is Monte Carlo: sample sequences, evaluate conditionals, average. Standard error falls as 1/√N, so N = 1000 gives roughly ±1.5% precision — well below the model's actual uncertainty, so sampling error is not the bottleneck.

Collapsing four-way to binary, and why

Series scorelines depend only on who won each map, not on whether it went to overtime. So the first step is summing each map's four-way distribution back down to a binary:

P(A wins map) = p_a_regulation + p_a_overtime

This is not wasted work — the four-way detail is reported to the user as its own output, and it feeds the narrative layer ("the deciding map is expected to be close"). It simply does not propagate into the scoreline computation.

There is a plausible refinement worth noting: an overtime map might correlate with fatigue or momentum effects on the next map, in which case the OT information would be relevant to the series. This is testable — does map-1 going to overtime predict map-2's outcome beyond what per-map features explain? — but assume independence in v1 and treat it as a diagnostic to run.

Path enumeration under map-specific probabilities

Given per-map binary probabilities, scoreline probabilities follow from enumerating paths. The essential subtlety: maps are not exchangeable trials. Map 2 and map 3 have different win probabilities, so this is not a binomial with fixed p. Each path must be evaluated with the correct per-map probabilities.

For a Bo3, with p₁, p₂, p₃ denoting P(A wins) on maps 1, 2, 3:

A 2-0 = p₁ · p₂
A 2-1 = p₁·(1−p₂)·p₃ + (1−p₁)·p₂·p₃
B 2-1 = (1−p₁)·p₂·(1−p₃) + p₁·(1−p₂)·(1−p₃)
B 2-0 = (1−p₁)·(1−p₂)

For a Bo5 the path counts follow the standard result: 1 path to 3-0, 3 paths to 3-1, 6 paths to 3-2 — the number of orderings of the losses among the games before the clinching one, i.e. C(k+2, k) for a 3-k scoreline. Enumeration is exact and cheap at these sizes; there is no need to simulate at this level, and simulating would only add variance.

Implementation note: write this as recursion over series state (a wins, b wins, map index) rather than hardcoding the formulas. The Bo5 case has 20 paths, and hand-expanding them is an obvious source of bugs. The recursive form handles Bo3, Bo5, and Bo7 identically.

Assumptions worth stating explicitly

Conditional independence across maps. Real matches have momentum and mid-series adaptation, so this is imperfect. It is directly testable — does the map-1 outcome predict the map-2 outcome beyond what features explain? If a dependency exists, add a "won previous map" feature to Stage 2 and condition the enumeration accordingly.

Per-map probabilities are calibrated. Errors compound multiplicatively through the path products, so Stage 2 miscalibration amplifies here — and it amplifies asymmetrically. Sweep probabilities (2-0, 3-0) are products of same-direction terms and are therefore most sensitive to overconfidence, while mixed scorelines partially cancel. A systematically overconfident Stage 2 will produce a scoreline distribution too heavily weighted toward sweeps. Checking predicted sweep rate against observed sweep rate is a cheap and effective diagnostic for exactly this failure.

Uncertainty decomposition

The three components are distinct in kind and should not be collapsed:

Aleatoric — irreducible randomness in the games. Already expressed by the distribution being spread rather than a point mass. More data does not reduce it. The four-way and scoreline outputs make this component visible rather than hiding it inside a single number, which is a substantive advantage of the granular formulation.

Epistemic — parameter uncertainty from limited data. Quantified by bootstrapping: resample training data, refit, observe the spread. Shrinks with more data.

Structural (veto-conditional) — variance across sampled veto sequences. Specific to this architecture and the most interpretable output: high variance means the match is decided by the veto rather than by team strength. Note this is not uncertainty about the world but about which world you end up in — it resolves the moment the veto happens, which makes it actionable in a way the other two are not.

Cross-cutting: evaluation as an ML foundation

Chronological splitting is a requirement, not a convention. Random splits assume exchangeability — that data points are interchangeable draws from one distribution. Sports time-series violates this: rosters change, metas shift, teams improve. Random splitting evaluates interpolation within a period when deployment demands extrapolation forward, and will overstate performance substantially.

Walk-forward validation for hyperparameter selection preserves this structure: train on everything before time t, validate at t, advance, repeat — mirroring the deployment condition at every fold.

Stage isolation — evaluating Stage 2 on true maps versus predicted maps — is an ablation that attributes error to its source. In cascaded systems an accuracy drop can originate at any stage, and compounding obscures the cause.

The granularity trade-off deserves explicit measurement. Moving from 2 outcomes to 4 (per map) and 6 (per series) subdivides the same ~100 samples across more categories, which necessarily increases variance in each category's estimate. The honest test is whether the granular model, marginalized back to a binary winner prediction, matches or beats a model trained directly on the binary target. If it loses substantially, the granularity is costing accuracy rather than adding information, and the ordinal structure needs strengthening or the category set needs simplifying. Run this comparison early — it determines whether the whole output specification is viable at v1 data scale.